Foreign Tax Credit Relief working sheet (FTCRWS)
Part 1: Calculate tax liability – one source of foreign income
Calculate the equivalent UK tax on your foreign income. This is done by carrying out 2 calculations.
One to calculate the total tax due including the foreign income and the second calculation without
the foreign income. Do not include tax on charges, notional tax and any reduction for credit for
foreign tax.

Appendix 1 provides help to complete the boxes on the working sheet.

a) Calculate the Income Tax on your total income, including the item subject to the Foreign Tax Credit 		
		 Relief (FTCR) claim.
b)	The amount of Income Tax which would be chargeable on your total income, excluding the item
    which is subject to the FTCR claim.
c) Deduct calculation b) from a).


Income Tax liability								
                                                                               FTC1   £


Income Tax liability without the source of foreign income			
                                                                               FTC2   £


UK tax chargeable on that income FTC1 minus FTC2			
                                                                               FTC3   £


If the foreign income has been taken into account in the computation of your allowances or any relief
(for example, retirement annuity relief) then the amount of your allowances and reliefs, for the purpose
of calculating tax credit relief only, should be recomputed to reflect the exclusion of the foreign income.
The foreign tax deducted from the income cannot be refunded by HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC).
This means that the amount of FTCR that can be claimed is always the smaller of the amount of:


a)	the UK tax chargeable on that income at FTC3				
    and
b) foreign tax paid								
                                                                               FTC4   £


c) relief allowed under any tax treaty with the UK				
                                                                               FTC5   £
			
Foreign Tax Credit Relief (lower of FTC3, FTC4 and FTC5)			
                                                                               FTC6   £


Enter the total FTCR on your income in box 2 on the Foreign (SA106) pages.




HS263 (2026) Working sheet 1                       Page 1
Part 2: Calculate tax liability – more than once source of foreign income
Calculate the equivalent UK tax on your foreign income. Where you have more than one source of income,
subject to a Foreign Tax Credit Relief (FTCR) claim they must be processed serially. For the second, and
subsequent claims, the calculation of liability on all income excludes all income previously considered for
FTCR. Do not include tax on charges, notional tax and any reduction for credit for foreign tax.
Calculate the Income Tax liability on your total income, including the items subject to the FTCR claim.


Income Tax liability								
                                                                             FTC1 i1   £

Item 1
Income Tax liability without the first source of foreign income		
                                                                             FTC2 i1   £

UK tax chargeable on that income FTC1 i1 minus FTC2 i1			
                                                                             FTC3 i1   £

The foreign tax deducted from the income cannot be refunded by HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC).
This means that the amount of FTCR that can be claimed is always the smaller of the amount of:

a)	the UK tax chargeable on that income at FTC3 i1			
    and
b) foreign tax paid								
                                                                             FTC4 i1   £

c) relief allowed under any tax treaty with the UK				
                                                                             FTC5 i1   £


FTCR (lower of FTC3 i1, FTC4 i1 and FTC5 i1)				
                                                                             FTC6 i1   £

Item 2

Income Tax liability from FTC2 i1						
                                                                             FTC1 i2   £


Income Tax liability without the first and second source of foreign income
                                                                             FTC2 i2   £

UK tax chargeable on that income FTC1 i2 minus FTC2 i2			
                                                                             FTC3 i2   £

The foreign tax deducted from the income cannot be refunded by HMRC. This means that the amount
of FTCR that can be claimed is always the smaller of the amount of:

a) the UK tax chargeable on that income at FTC3 i2				
		 and
                                                      FTC4 i2 £
b) foreign tax paid								

c) relief allowed under any tax treaty with the UK				
                                                                             FTC5 i2   £

FTCR(lower of FTC3 i2, FTC4 i2 and FTC5 i2)				
                                                                             FTC6 i2   £




HS263 (2026) Working sheet 1                     Page 2
Part 2: Calculate tax liability – more than once source of foreign income – continued


Item 3

Income Tax liability from FTC2 i1						
                                                                             FTC1 i3   £

Income Tax liability without the first and second source of foreign income
                                                                             FTC2 i3   £

UK tax chargeable on that income FTC1 i3 minus FTC2 i3			
                                                                             FTC3 i3   £

The foreign tax deducted from the income cannot be refunded by HMRC. This means that the
amount of FTCR that can be claimed is always the smaller of the amount of:

a) the UK tax chargeable on that income at FTC3 i3			
   and
b) foreign tax paid								
                                                                             FTC4 i3   £


c) relief allowed under any tax treaty with the UK				
                                                                             FTC5 i3   £


FTCR (lower of FTC3 i3, FTC4 i3 and FTC5 i3)				
                                                                             FTC6 i3   £

Add up the figures in boxes FTC6 i1, FTC6 i2 and FTC6 i3 if completed and enter the total FTCR on
your income in box 2 on the Foreign (SA106) pages.

If you have further items of income for which you are claiming FTCR use a separate sheet of paper
to calculate FTC6 i4, FTC6 i5 and so on and add all amounts from the separate calculations together.
Enter the total FTCR on your income in box 2 on the Foreign (SA106) pages.




HS263 (2026) Working sheet 1                     Page 3
