Tell HMRC about a student or postgraduate loan in your tax return
Source: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/tell-hmrc-about-a-student-loan-in-your-tax-return
Retrieved (UTC): 2026-09-18T16:21:38.851994+00:00
Updated: 2026-05-12T15:04:13+01:00

If you complete a Self Assessment tax return, you must use it to tell HMRC about your student or postgraduate loan deductions.

You’ll need to complete the student or postgraduate loan repayment section of your Self Assessment tax return if the Student Loans Company (SLC) has said your repayments were due to start on or before 6 April of the year you’re completing your return for.

If you are paying a student loan and a postgraduate loan then you will need to complete both sections. If you do not give the correct information, you may have to pay penalties.

If you are using Making Tax Digital for Income Tax, you will need compatible software (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/choose-the-right-software-for-making-tax-digital-for-income-tax):

- to complete and submit your tax return

- that works with student and postgraduate loans

Your student and postgraduate loan repayments will be calculated in your tax return for you.

Your student loan Plan 1, 2 or 4 deduction will be calculated based on 9% of your total Self Assessment income above the threshold of your repayment plan type (https://www.gov.uk/repaying-your-student-loan/which-repayment-plan-you-are-on).

Your postgraduate loan deduction will be calculated based on 6% of your total Self Assessment income above the threshold.

Total income for Self Assessment includes:

- any PAYE (Pay As You Earn) employment income you had in the relevant tax year — your income for all employments will be combined, even if they were under the threshold through PAYE

-

other income to declare, such as:

- self-employed profits

- property income

- unearned income in excess of £2,000

-  income affected by the new tax year basis (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/changes-to-reporting-income-from-self-employment-and-partnerships) (also known as Basis Period Reform)

If you were employed in the relevant tax year, and your pay was over the threshold for your loan or plan type, then your employer would have taken student and postgraduate loan repayments from your salary through PAYE. We will deduct these repayments from the amount you have to repay through Self Assessment.

If the off‑payroll working rules apply to you, you must make your student and postgraduate loan repayments through Self Assessment.

If you are repaying a Plan 1, 2 or 4 student loan and postgraduate loan at the same time, you’ll be due to repay 15% of your total income above the threshold.

Information on your loan or plan type is supplied to HMRC by the SLC.

The SLC will not tell HMRC your loan balance, but they will tell HMRC if you have:

- repaid your loan in full

- been charged more than you owe

HMRC will take action to reduce or remove your Self Assessment student or postgraduate loan deductions so you do not pay back too much.

You’ll need to give your loan or plan type information when you file your Self Assessment tax return online (https://www.gov.uk/log-in-file-self-assessment-tax-return). If you decide not to file your return online, you can either:

- download a paper return (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/self-assessment-tax-return-sa100)

- call HMRC and ask for a paper return (https://www.gov.uk/find-hmrc-contacts/self-assessment-forms-ordering)

Information you’ll need

You’ll need details of any:

- student loan or postgraduate loan repayment plan you are on — sign in to your online account (https://www.gov.uk/sign-in-to-manage-your-student-loan-balance) or check which repayment plan you’re on (https://www.gov.uk/repaying-your-student-loan/which-repayment-plan-you-are-on) to find your plan type

- amounts already deducted through your employment

- payrolled benefits in kind from your employer

-  Self-Employment Income Support Scheme grants (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/tell-hmrc-and-pay-the-self-employment-income-support-scheme-grant-back) you received

If you have had more than one job in the year, you’ll need to add up the repayments shown on all of your payslips, rather than just those of the most recent job. Your P60 (https://www.gov.uk/paye-forms-p45-p60-p11d/p60) will not show the amounts deducted by a previous employer.

If you do not have access to some or all of your payslips, you can contact your:

- previous employer

- current employer

If you’ve had more than one source of income in the year, you might have to pay more than just your PAYE deductions.

Off-payroll working

If you are subject to the off-payroll working rules for any period during the tax year, your student and postgraduate loan deductions for that period will be calculated through your Self Assessment tax return.

How to fill in your online tax return

Section 2 — ‘Tell us about you’

Select ‘Yes’.

If the SLC have told you that your repayments started on or before the 6 April of the year you’re completing your return for, even if an employer made repayment deductions or your income was below the relevant threshold, you need to choose either:

- the student loan plan type you’re repaying

- postgraduate loan

- the student loan plan type and postgraduate loan, if you are paying both loans back at the same time

These boxes may already be completed for you.

HMRC systems will then use the information supplied by the SLC to work out the correct repayment amounts due for:

- student loan

- postgraduate loan

- student loan and postgraduate loan, if you are paying both loans back at the same time

If you change the boxes:

- a warning message will be issued advising that the entry is different from the plan type or loan provided by the SLC — the warning message will advise you to check the letter from the SLC for the correct loan or plan type

- an automatic calculation will be issued advising HMRC has changed the loan, plan type and the effect this has had on the calculation

Recording incorrect loan types will affect the student loan and postgraduate loan amount charged. HMRC systems will verify the information supplied by the SLC and a calculation will be automatically issued to advise of any changes.

These are the only questions you have to answer if you’re repaying your student loan or postgraduate loan, or both, and do not have any PAYE income.

Section 4 — ‘Fill in your return’

Put the total of the amounts already deducted through your employment for the tax year you’re completing your return for. You can find these amounts on your P60 or by adding up all the deductions for the student loan, postgraduate loan, or for both, on your payslips for that year.

You need to record the student loan plan type deductions and postgraduate loan deductions separately in the relevant boxes.

Do not include any overseas direct debit payments or voluntary payments you have made in this section.

The repayment amount deducted by your employer may already show here. You need to check the amount is correct even if it’s zero.

If it’s correct, then select ‘Yes’ and ‘Save and continue’.

If it’s not correct, choose ‘No’ and enter the correct amount. Remember to tell us why the figure is different and include the name and date of the document that shows this.

We’ll check the amount given against the information provided by your employer.

Recording incorrect deductions will affect the student loan and postgraduate loan charges, and could result in you being charged more.

Watch a video to help you complete your tax return

You can watch YouTube videos to help you complete this section.

Watch a YouTube video about why a tax return asks about income contingent student loans.

Why does my tax return ask about income contingent student loans? (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8HAJrxMlfg)

Watch a YouTube video about why a tax return asks about postgraduate loans.

Why does my tax return ask about postgraduate loans? (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_PSNjdnc8OE)

Watch a YouTube video about how to show student loan and postgraduate loan repayments on your tax return.

How do I show student loan and postgraduate loan repayments on my tax return? (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fb1UZNtoDJs)

How to fill in your paper tax return

Box 1

Put an ‘X’ in box 1 if the SLC have told you that your repayments started on or before 6 April of the year you’re completing your return for, even if the income is below the threshold for the loan type.

This is the only question you have to answer if you’re repaying your student loan, postgraduate loan, or both, and do not have any PAYE income.

Box 2

Put the total of all student loan Plan 1, 2 or 4 deductions taken from all your employments through PAYE in the tax year you’re completing your return for. You will find this information on your P60 or by adding up all the Plan 1, 2 or 4 deductions on your payslips for that year.

Box 3

Put the total of all postgraduate loan deductions taken from all your employments through PAYE in the tax year you’re completing your return for. You will find this information on your P60 or by adding up all the postgraduate loan deductions on your payslips for that year.

Recording incorrect deductions will affect the student loan and postgraduate charges, and could result in you being charged more.

If you are paying both student loan and postgraduate loan then complete box 2 and box 3.

Using Making Tax Digital for Income Tax

Making Tax Digital for Income Tax is a way for some sole traders and landlords to tell HMRC about their self-employment and property income and expenses. You can find out more about Making Tax Digital for Income Tax (https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/making-tax-digital-for-income-tax).

Your software will show your repayment plan and loan type if you:

-

signed up for Making Tax Digital for Income Tax

-

have authorised your Making Tax Digital software

-

are due to be repaying a student or postgraduate loan

If you think the information is incorrect, you should check your student loan details in your online account (https://www.gov.uk/sign-in-to-manage-your-student-loan-balance).

Sending quarterly updates

Your quarterly updates will include information about your self-employment and property income and expenses. If you have student loan information, this will be automatically included when you send your quarterly updates.

Based on information held by HMRC, your software will pre-populate:

- student loan plan type and postgraduate loan

- any student and postgraduate loan deductions taken by your employer, if you have one

You will see estimates of your student and postgraduate loan repayments if the total income included in your quarterly updates is above the relevant repayment threshold (https://www.gov.uk/repaying-your-student-loan/what-you-pay).

These estimates:

-

are for information only

-

do not reduce your loan balance during the tax year

If you finish paying off your student or postgraduate loan during the tax year, you will:

-

stop seeing estimates

-

not need to pay any student or postgraduate loan through your tax return

Submitting your tax return

Before submitting your tax return using Making Tax Digital software, you may need to make adjustments or add any other income. Your student and postgraduate repayment will be calculated on your total annual income above the relevant annual plan or loan threshold.

If you finish paying off your student or postgraduate loan during the tax year, the student or postgraduate loan repayment will not be included in your tax return.

If you have PAYE employment and there are student or postgraduate loan deductions, these are taken off your total student or postgraduate loan charge.

Your student and postgraduate loan charge will:

-

replace any estimates calculated when you submitted your quarterly updates

-

be included in your total tax liability

-

be due to be paid by 31 January, following the end of the tax year

-

be sent to the Student Loans Company to be applied against your loan balance

For information about Making Tax Digital for Income Tax and payrolled benefits in kind, check the ‘If you have payrolled benefits in kind’ section.

Overseas Direct Debit payments

If you have been paying Direct Debit payments to the SLC while you have been abroad your tax return will need to include your total income.

Your student loan repayments will be calculated on this total income, but will not take into account the Direct Debit payments you have already made to the SLC.

After you send your tax return, contact the Student Loan Company (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/contact-slc-repayment-enquiries) and they will tell HMRC how much you have paid.

HMRC then uses this figure to reduce the amount of tax you owe.

Voluntary payments

If you want to, you can make additional payments to the SLC. These voluntary payments are separate to amounts collected by your employer or through your tax return. Making voluntary payments will not change the amounts collected by your employer or through your tax return.

You cannot choose to make these additional payments instead of your normal payments and voluntary payments cannot be refunded.

Voluntary payments will reduce the overall length of your loan and the interest charged on it.

Find out how to make a voluntary payment (https://www.gov.uk/repaying-your-student-loan/make-extra-repayments).

If you have payrolled benefits in kind

For student and postgraduate loan repayments you should not calculate payrolled benefits in kind that are subject to Class 1A National Insurance contributions (https://www.gov.uk/national-insurance/national-insurance-classes) only.

Employer benefits included in payrolled benefits in kind (this means tax deducted from your pay and included in your P60 or P45) that are subject to Class 1A National Insurance contributions are:

- company cars and vans

- fuel for company cars and vans

- private medical and dental insurance

- goods and other assets provided by your employer

For tax years 2023 to 2024 or earlier, our Self Assessment system could not tell the difference between these payrolled benefits in kind and the rest of the PAYE income. As a result, these were included in the student loan and postgraduate loan repayments calculations.

From the tax year 2024 to 2025, HMRC have added a new box to the Self Assessment tax return to report the payrolled benefits included in your employment income.

You should follow the steps for the relevant tax year if you are completing an online or paper tax return and:

- you are in repayment of a student and postgraduate loan

- your employer has payrolled your benefits in kind that are subject to Class 1A National Insurance contributions only

If you complete an online tax return

From the 2024 to 2025 tax year onwards, you should do the following.

-

Go to the ‘Fill in your return’ section (section 4) and find the ‘Income for your employer’ section.

-

Enter the total PAYE income that is shown on your P45 or P60 in the ‘pay from employer’ box.

-

Enter the Class 1A National Insurance contributions payrolled benefits in kind figure in the ‘Payrolled benefits included in pay which affect your student loan repayments’ box.

For 2023 to 2024 tax year or earlier, you should do the following.

-

Deduct your payrolled benefits in kind that are subject to Class 1A National Insurance contributions only from your total PAYE income that is shown on your P45 or P60 (your employer can provide the figures if you are unsure).

-

Go to the ‘Fill in your return’ section (section 4), find the ‘Income for your employer’ section.

-

Enter the figure from step 1 into the ‘pay from employer’ (box employment 03).

-

Select ‘yes’ when asked if you have received taxable benefits from your employer.

-

In the next section, enter the Class 1A National Insurance contributions payrolled benefits in kind figure in the ’other benefits’ box (box employment 20).

-

Enter the following note in ‘additional information’ box — ‘I have entered my payrolled benefits in kind in the ‘other benefits’ section as I’m a student loan borrower’.

If you complete a paper return

From 2024 to 2025 tax year onwards, you should do the following.

-

Go to the SA102 employment page, enter the total PAYE income that is shown on your P45 or P60 in the ‘pay from this employment’ box (box 1).

-

Enter the Class 1A National Insurance contributions payrolled benefits in kind figure in the SA102 employment box 1.1 ‘Payrolled benefits include in pay which affect your student loan repayments’.

For 2023 to 2024 tax year or earlier, you should do the following.

-

Deduct your payrolled benefits in kind that are subject to Class 1A National Insurance contributions only from your total PAYE income as shown on your P45 or P60 (your employer can provide the figures if you are unsure).

-

Go to the employment page and enter this figure in the ‘pay from this employment’ box (box 1).

-

Enter the Class 1A National Insurance contributions benefits in kind figure into the ‘other benefits’ box (box 15) on the ‘employment’ page.

-

On the SA100 form, enter the following note on page TR7 into the ‘any other information’ box (box 19) — ‘Figure entered in box 15 relates to my payrolled benefits in kind as I am a student loan borrower’.

If you use Making Tax Digital for Income Tax

When you are completing your tax return in your compatible software, you will need to enter a figure for your Class 1A National Insurance contributions payrolled benefits in kind.

From April 2027, payrolled benefit in kind amounts will pre-populate based on the information held by HMRC.

Example of how to work out and enter your payrolled benefits in kind on your tax return for the 2024 to 2025 tax year onwards

The total income on your P45 or P60 is £50,000 (including a company car benefit). Your employer confirms the ‘benefit in kind’ figure is £10,000 for the company car.

You would enter £50,000 in the ‘pay from employment’ box (online return) or ‘pay from this employment’ box (paper return).

You would enter £10,000 in the ‘Payrolled benefits included in pay which affect your student loan repayments’ box.

Example of how to work out and enter your payrolled benefits in kind on your tax return for the 2023 to 2024 tax year or earlier

The total income on your P45 or P60 is £50,000 (including a company car benefit). Your employer confirms the company car benefit is £10,000.

This means your PAYE income figure is £40,000 and your ‘benefits in kind’ figure is £10,000.

You would enter £40,000 in the ‘pay from employment’ box (online return) or ‘pay from this employment’ box (paper return).

You would enter £10,000 in ‘other benefits’ box (online and paper return).
