Private residence relief: only or main residence: meaning of residence: the meaning in a wider context
Identifier: CG64455
Source: https://www.gov.uk/hmrc-internal-manuals/capital-gains-manual/cg64455
Published: 2016-03-12T11:55:16+00:00
Updated: 2021-05-19T14:05:13+01:00
Retrieved (UTC): 2026-09-18T14:44:47.465526+00:00

Outside the field of taxation there are many circumstances in which the identification of an individual’s residence is important. Whilst the word must be construed by reference to its particular context, the use of the word in a similar context to that with which we are concerned assists in the interpretation to be used for private residence relief.

One such example is the identification of the constituency in which an individual is resident for the purpose of voting. Under the Representation of the People Act 1948, entitlement to vote was given to persons resident in a constituency on a qualifying date. In the case of Fox v Stirk, Ricketts v Registration Officer for the City of Cambridge [1970] 3 All ER 7 the Court of Appeal considered whether students should be resident in the constituency of the University that they attended. In his judgment, Lord Denning M.R. cited a passage from the speech of Viscount Cave L.C. in Levene v. Inland Revenue Commissioners [1928] AC 217,

“… the word ‘reside’ is a familiar English word and is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary as meaning ‘to dwell permanently or for a considerable time, to have one’s settled or usual abode, to live in or at a particular place’.”

Lord Denning went on to say,

“I derive three principles. The first is that a man can have two residences. He can have a flat in London and a house in the country. He is resident in both. The second principle is that temporary presence at an address does not make a man resident there. A guest who comes for the weekend is not resident. A short stay visitor is not resident. The third principle is that temporary absence does not deprive a person of his residence. If he happens to be away for a holiday or away for the weekend or in hospital, he does not lose his residence on that account.”

Further to this Lord Widgery commented,

“This conception of residence is of a place where a man is based or where he continues to live, the place where he sleeps and shelters and has his home. It is imperative to remember in this context that ‘residence’ implies a degree of permanence. In the words of the Oxford English Dictionary, it is concerned with something which will go on for a considerable time. Consequently a person is not entitled to claim to be a resident at a given town merely because he pays a short, temporary visit. Some assumption of permanence, some degree of continuity, some expectation of continuity, is a vital factor which turns simple occupation into residence.”

These comments are regarded as equally applicable to private residence relief and were relied on in the case of Goodwin v Curtis (70TC4788).

In this case the meaning of the word ‘residence’ was considered further.

In 1983 Mr Goodwin set up a company to acquire Hazleton Manor Farmhouse. At that time, he was buying it with a view to making it a home for himself and his family. On 1 April 1985 Mr Goodwin acquired the farmhouse from the company, but prior to the completion of his purchase he had instructed agents to sell the farmhouse. At the time of his acquisition he had separated from his wife and he took up temporary residence in the farmhouse until 3 May 1985 when the farmhouse was sold. Mr Goodwin contended that the farmhouse was his only or main residence.

In the High Court, Sir John Vinelott drew heavily on the observations of Lord Denning and Widgery L.J. in Fox v Stirk, Ricketts v Registration Officer for the City of Cambridge [1970] 3 All ER 7, and he also quoted with approval the line taken by Brightman J in Sansom v Peay (52TC1).

Sir John said,

“Amongst the factors to be weighed by the Commissioners are the degree of permanence, continuity and the expectation of continuity. On the facts found by the Commissioners in this case…

…in my judgment, they were fully entitled to take the view that the farmhouse was used not as a residence but as mere temporary accommodation for a period that the taxpayer hoped would be brief and which in fact lasted some 32 days between completion of the sale to him and the completion of the sale by him.”

The Court of Appeal upheld the decision of the Commissioners and the High Court that Mr Goodwin had not established a residence in the farmhouse; it had merely provided temporary accommodation. Millett L J stated in the Court of Appeal,

“What I derive from Viscount Cave’s speech is that the word ‘reside’ is an ordinary word of the English language and is eminently suitable for a lay tribunal such as the General Commissioners to apply.”

He went on,

“they (the Commissioners) must be taken to have accepted the Revenue’s submission that the quality of the taxpayer’s occupation of the farmhouse did not have a sufficient degree of permanence, continuity or expectation of continuity to justify its description as residence.”

And later,

“Temporary occupation at an address does not make a man resident there. The question whether the occupation is sufficient to make him resident is one of fact and degree for the Commissioners to decide.”

He went on to say,

“The substance of the Commissioners’ finding taken as a whole, in my judgment, is that the nature, quality, length and circumstances of the taxpayer’s occupation of the Farmhouse did not make his occupation qualify as residence.”

Schiemann LJ added,

“I agree with the judgment that has just been delivered. I accept, as did the Commissioners, the Crown’s contention that in order to qualify for the relief a taxpayer must provide some evidence that his residence in the property showed some degree of permanence, some degree of continuity or some expectation of continuity”.
