Working sheet


Amount of extra wages* you could have got		
                                                                        A £


Value of accommodation** to be entered in box 14		
                                                                        B £

Amount to enter in box 13 (box A minus box B)
(enter ‘0’ if less than zero)			
                                                                        C £
* 	Enter the amount of extra wages for the year or, if the living accommodation was not
  provided to you for the whole year, the amount for the period it was provided.
**	Before any deduction for part of the living accommodation used exclusively for the
   duties of your job (see Step 6).




                                                              Page 1
Working sheet to calculate the taxable value of living accommodation that cost £75,000 or less
If you had living accommodation, and it has a rateable value and cost £75,000 or less and you do not share it with any
other employees, Steps 1 to 7 will work out taxable amount X. This is the basic calculation.
If the living accommodation cost more than £75,000, the value of the benefit is the sum of taxable amount X (at Step 7)
plus taxable amount Y (see Step 8).
Ask your employer for information about the cost of the living accommodation. If you share the living accommodation with
other employees, or if it does not have a rateable value, or if you need more information, read booklet 480 Expenses and
benefits – A tax guide available from Self Assessment: forms ordering, or ask us or your tax adviser for help.

Step 1
Find out if the person who bears the cost of providing you with the living accommodation (this will
usually be your employer but may have been someone else) pays rent and/or a lease premium for
the property. Enter the total of the yearly rent and any amount of the lease premium attributed to
the period as rent. For example, your employer may pay rent of £5,000 and no lease premium.
If so, enter £5,000 in box A. If your employer has paid or will pay a lease premium for the property,
read ‘How to work out the lease premium’ on Helpsheet 202.			
                                                                                                              A £

Step 2
Find out what the gross rateable value was when the property was last rated. If the property was
in Scotland multiply this figure by 100/270. Enter this in box B. For example, a property in England
may have had a rateable value of £500. If so, you would enter £500 in box B. (If the property was
in Scotland and it had a rateable value of £1,350 you would again enter £500 in box B
as 100/270 x £1,350 = £500.)					
                                                                                                              B £

Step 3
Enter in box C the higher of box A or box B*. In the example this would be the £5,000 rent paid.
If your employer had owned the property and not paid rent you would enter £500.		
                                                                                                              C £

Step 4
If you pay any money for the living accommodation (to the person mentioned at Step 1),
enter in box D the total you paid for the year unless the amount in box C is less than what
you pay. If so, copy box C to box D.					
                                                                                                              D £

Step 5
Subtract box D from box C. Enter the result in box E. For example, if you paid £30 a week to
your employer throughout the year you would subtract £1,560 (£30 x 52) from £,5,000,
and enter the result, £3,440, in box E.
                                                                                                              E £

Step 6
If any part of the living accommodation is set aside exclusively for the duties of your job then
multiply the amount in box C (or box E, if appropriate) by the fraction that the part makes of the
whole accommodation. This is the business use amount. For example, if one room is a study that
you use all the time for work, and that room is 1/7 of the whole living accommodation, then the
business amount is £492 (£3,440 x 1/7).
                                                                                    				Business use amount
                                                                                                                £

Step 7
Subtract the business use amount (if any) from box C or box E, as appropriate. This is taxable
amount X. In the example, taxable amount X would be £2,948 (£3,440 minus £492).
                                                                                     Taxable amount X
                                                                                                                £

Enter taxable amount X in box 14 in your Employment page unless the living accommodation cost more than £75,000.
If so, there may be an additional calculation. Follow Step 8 if you need to do the additional calculation and work out
taxable amount Y.


* 	If the living accommodation was provided to you for part of the tax year only, take an appropriate proportion of
  the higher figure. For instance, if the accommodation was first provided to you on 6 October 2025, the
  appropriate proportion would be 183/365 x £5,000 = £2,506.




                                                                Page 2
Working sheet to calculate the taxable value of living accommodation that cost more than £75,000
Step 8
Use this section to work out taxable amount Y* if the living accommodation cost more than £75,000. The cost includes expenditure
incurred in acquiring an estate or interest in the property. For example, a premium paid under a lease is part of the cost of the property.
Enter in box F one of the following:
• the cost of the living accommodation (including the cost of improvements made to it since it was acquired)
• the market value of the accommodation at the date you first occupied it, plus the cost of any subsequent improvements,
   if you first occupied the living accommodation after 30 March 1983, and your employer** held an interest in it throughout
   a period beginning 6 years before you first occupied the living accommodation**

Cost of the living accommodation (including cost of improvements)			
                                                                                                                F £

Payments made by you towards that cost or for the grant of a tenancy			
                                                                                                                G £

				
                                                                                                                H £

                                                                                                                J £


                                                                                                                K £

                                                                                                                               days

                                                                                                                L £

                                                                                                               M £

                                                                                                                N £

                                                                                                                P £




                                                                                                                Q £



                                                                                     Business use amount
                                                                                                                    £

Subtract the business use amount from the figure in box Q.
This is taxable amount Y		                                                              Taxable amount Y
                                                                                                                    £
                                                                                                                           +

Enter taxable amount X from Step 7				                                                  Taxable amount X
                                                                                                                    £
                                                                                                                           =
Add taxable amount X to taxable amount Y. Enter the total in box 14 in your
Employment page					
                                                                                                                    £

*If taxable amount X is based on the full open market rent, then ignore Step 8 and taxable amount Y.
**Or whoever provided the accommodation to you, or a connected person.
Optional remuneration arrangements
If the accommodation is provided under an optional remuneration arrangement then the taxable amount to be entered in box 14
in your Employment page is calculated as follows.
Value of living accommodation is less than £75,000
Compare the amount in box C with the amount of salary or pay forgone by you for the accommodation. Subtract any money paid
by you for the living accommodation, (box D) from the higher of box C or the amount forgone and enter the result in box E.
If the cost of the accommodation was more than £75,000
Depending on whether the accommodation was provided for part of the tax year only, add the amount in K or L to C. Compare the
total amount (K or L + C) with the amount of salary or pay forgone by you for the accommodation. Subtract the rent paid by you
for the accommodation from the higher of these 2 figures and enter the net amount in Q.

                                                                 Page 3
